# Casting the ballot

## Capturing the Moment

I started at the Department about 3 years ago, right in the middle of the Cali/Cascadia secession drama. In retrospect, by sheer luck, I found myself at the *exact* center of it.

I had stumbled into a temporary gig as an election monitor in south Tacoma. Right up until the riot shields and antidrone ray-guns appeared, I witnessed a remarkably free and fair election conducted with nothing but papers, No. 2 pencils, and repurposed testing Scantrons from every public school in the Pacific Northwest.

The technocrats from Cali called their northern American countrymen luddites, but I always thought the "slow-tech or no-tech" campaign was a brilliant way to build trust with people who had in their lifetimes been betrayed three times over by silicon, fibre, and crypto. If your vote is going to actually influence your world for the first time in 16 years, you can't leave it to 'experts' to tell you that it works, or to 'technology' that promises to do the work for you; you've got to feel it yourself, in your bones, with your people. To create trust, use trusty tools. To verify, use your common senses. The Cascadia Interim Executive Council was idealistic to a fault, but they knew their people and were clear on their values. 

In a Puyallup middle school I ate a cardboard bagel and sipped powder-creamed coffee while watching some PLU students put the last roll of chicken wire onto a big makeshift faraday cage that sat in the center of the gymnasium. I felt the heavy metal corner of my Pentax K1000 and off-brand telephoto lens press against the small of my back, and hurried to finish the bagel and free up one hand to take a hasty shot before the they climbed down from the ladder. It wasn't a big lens, but with the adapter it added an annoying bit of bulk to my kit that I hadn't gotten accustomed to carrying yet.

Within the cage, 13 Scantrons were set onto folding tables, each with a plastic USPS crate underneath labeled with a hastily applied color-coded label: < OUT / COUNTED >. Each crate sat atop a scale that displayed its weight in bright red digits. If all went according to plan, only 8 of the machines would be in use at any moment over the 6-day counting period, but any voter had the right to request a random substitution with the machines "on the bench". They would roll a pair of dice to pick a new one to feed their ballot through.

The 6th and 7th grade classrooms in the adjacent building had been converted into polling centers and ballot seminars, where educational sessions were held the whole month prior to the vote, allowing anyone to come in and learn about the voting process, ask questions, and talk with each other about their picks for Governor, cabinet, ambassadors, or about any of the 16 budgets assigned to this polling center. To older Americans it was a confusing and time-intensive new way to exercise an old right, but to a generation "convenienced" by modern automata, time was one of the only resources they had in abundance.

The "ring" was supposed to be observed at all times by no fewer than 21 people, who could watch the voting/counting process from any angle they liked outside the cage. Most sat on the wooden folding bleachers opposite the entry/exit queues, but there were folding chairs scattered around here and there, and a snack table for observers underneath a tattered basketball net on the far side. Here and there some folks had set up tripods oversized for the tiny 360° cameras they supported six feet off the ground.

A long line of early voters had already formed outside the gymnasium doors, and the official start time of 8am had passed 33 minutes ago, but the volunteer staff were steadfast and calm in their final checks. The district lead for this station had already gone outside to announce that doors would open no later than 9. He now walked over with a worn triangular wood block, pressed the waist-level metal bar, and after setting the doorstop in, welcomed the first voters into the gym. I watched the line creep forward all afternoon in an oddly soothing, silent procession as voters carried their ballots to the ring to be loaded. There was no rule that prohibited conversation, but as the line approached the ring, most people who understood the gravity of this election were content to let the sound of the gentle, methodical buzz of Scantron marking echo through the gym.

The vote was iterative, and counted publicly. Whenever a mail crate reached 20 pounds of counted ballots, one of the counting crew would ring a little bell, another would seal the box with some special one-use tape, and a third would update a janky Excel graph with the budget numbers displayed from a projector hung from the top of the cage. The boxes were to be shipped to the county courthouse for verification, but the informal results from each polling center could be published at the end of each day.

The array of Scantrons in the ring was part of a system designed to create 'the vote matrix'. Each ballot contained the pairwise preferences of a voter, distilled to the simplest possible expression of opinion: 'which is better, policy A or policy B?'. The process of 'counting' the ballots meant taking the sum-total of all preferences for an individual voter, and calculating a single expression that indicated every A or B judgment the voter had marked, and then updating the vote matrix. Each voter had the choice to mark as many of the items on the ballot as they liked, up until they reached the limit of every possible preference. The vote matrix, comprising the sum of all ballots, was a weighted distillation of the country's general will. The clever sleight of hand in this system was to treat the relative weights of the vote matrix not as some abstract probability vector, but as line items on a nascent national budget. Throughout the Pacific Northwest, people would be participating in a new kind of direct democracy; literally voting to allocate the first budgets of each agency in their new government.

As the gym filled with the deep orange-pink of summer sunset, a small commotion erupted inside the ring. An elderly man's shouting was met with the stronger, calming tones of two vote counter volunteers with obvious experience in education, likely from the middle school. A buzzer sounded, signaling a pause in the count, and moments later the district lead hurried over.

The man looked like my Uncle Shallom from Indiana and carried himself with the same playful confidence of a man that had been a well-respected leader in a small immigrant church community for decades. After assessing the situation, he pulled a slim booklet from his leather-bound legal pad folder and inspected it as an umpire consults a rulebook. Seemingly satisfied with what he read, he paused to collect his thoughts, gave a nod to the old man, and turned to address the now-silent onlookers.

I pulled the K1000 out, noted the room's new lighting, composed the shot, and waited. I heard a flurry of DSLR shutters, but held the frame patiently. There would be only one moment here worth capturing. Also, analog film was damn expensive.

"Okay, so, we have a scanner issue folks!" He half-shouted as one of the teachers handed him a ballot.

"This ballot failed to mark, because the voter made thin little check-marks indicating their vote, and the Scantrons need a clear, filled-in bubble in order to scan properly."  

"Now we can see that the voter's preferences are all still discernable; they only marked a single choice on every line of the ballot, or no marks indicating no preference, which we all remember from the commercials is everyone's right." 

As he said this, he held the ballot up next to his own face and grinned at the observers sitting in the front row of the bleachers, who were half-standing to see the marks on the skinny paper card. I pressed the shutter.

"So what we're going to do here is proceed with a manual vote loading. I have here a duplicate card that has been marked by Sarah here, which y'all can verify is the same as this invalid ballot, but with heavy, filled-in bubbles. Once we're all on the same page... er, card, we'll load the ballot back into the count and resume." 

He walked up to the chicken wire and held the two ballots out toward the bleachers. It was absolutely silent in the gym. The intensity of the observers was earnest and genuine, as if everyone present felt that this was a duty, when the rules were laid out clearly and all were fulfilling their proper roles as parts of a noble whole. Some even got up and walked over to check each individual bubble on the newly created replacement ballot. 'Two moments,' I thought to myself, and took one more picture.

As I was putting the lens-cap back on, I felt a sudden, crisp optimism for the future of Cascadia— or rather for the people around me and the purpose they found enacting this bizarre new voting process; like I was in the midst of the big Bollywood dance scene just before intermission. I savored the feeling for a while, and then just as suddenly as the optimism had come, it was replaced with a black cloud of dread. My heart beat a little faster with the squirt of anxious adrenaline. I stood up and reached for the crumpled pack of cigarettes in my jacket pocket while I walked outside into the back parking lot of the school. 

I looked at Ranier in the twilight and tried to pinpoint the cause of my near-panic-attack, but it wasn’t anything in particular; just a pervasive gut feeling. What I felt inside was a rush of pure hope and faith in humanity’s goodness, and the anxiety came from a sudden awareness that there should be a dark side to this, but it seemed conspicuously absent. 

Absentmindedly I pulled out my camera, set the speed to 1/30th, cranked the aperture wide, and framed a shot of the mountain. I held my breath and thought about unseen darkness as the smoke from my cigarette wafted into my eyes and made them water. I began to squeeze the shutter, but I instinctively hesitated as I heard a strange rumbling sound in the distance. I thought I saw something move in the horizon as the viewfinder went black briefly, and then a few seconds later the unmistakable sound of a fighter jet engine boomed across the empty parking lot. By the time I put the camera down to look at the sky, there was nothing to see. 

### The Photo

In the bathtub of my apartment, I developed the negatives and hung them up to dry. Outside sounded hectic. Sirens and tire screeches in the distance; an end-of-the-world party raging across the street. I went out to the balcony to smoke, and looked down to see an overweight guy with a messenger bag parking a comically slender road bike in the loading zone of my apartment complex. I watched him disappear into the lobby. A minute later, my door buzzer rang. Curiously, I went to open the door, but found that the man was already at least two flights back down the stairs. On my welcome mat sat an unmarked package about half the size of a shoebox. I set the package on the table and hurried to the balcony, but the man was already gracefully gliding downhill. When I returned to look at the thing, I noticed a waybill taped to its side. "For immediate delivery: commit 0xe5610a46" was all it said. I grabbed a knife and sliced the stickers holding the top flap in place and cautiously opened the box. Inside, atop whatever this object was, sat a note printed on mint green perforated paper.

```
Congratulations on your first successful farfetching! Please proceed according to your best judgement, and allow 4-6 weeks for paystream calibration. In the meantime, it would be helpful to familiarize yourself with account generation, guidelines, and VM setup instructions located in the Department handbook.
```

I read the words again without understanding and looked down at the object. It was a device of some kind, but that's about all I could guess about the thing. It had a rectangular matte black metal housing surrounding what looked like a small screen, two usbc ports and an unusually large barrel plug power port on one side, and a physical knob that turned with satisfying clicks on the other. It felt sturdy and industrial in my hand when I picked it up. I almost didn't notice the booklet tucked into the bottom of the box were it not for the big title printed in serif font: `the Department handbook, 5th edition`. It had been a long day and my attention was already fraying, so I reclined on the couch and resolved to figure out this nonsense in the morning. 

I opened my phone to doomscroll a bit, and jumped up when my feed refreshed. I ran to the bathroom to pull down the hanging negatives and carefully snapped the scanner slide around them, and fed it into my workstation. I enlarged the last photo I had taken-- a photo that only I had seen at that point. I must've stared at it for an hour or so wondering what to do next. For some reason, I picked up the Department handbook and flipped through it....

## 4-6 weeks later

The airstrike on Cap Hill in Seattle had killed more than half of the members of the CIEC, and with them died the collective spirit of Cascadia. I had found my dark side after all, and felt a little guilty when I realized that my anxiety had also melted away with the revelation.

The Duke of Cali initially denied any involvement in the attack, but by the time my photo was on the front page of Reddit, he had stopped making public comment. Briefly, an accusation of deepfakery made the rounds, but the internet would have none of it; a galvanized community of AI, web3, and astrophotography nerds coordinated rigorous analysis of the photo, of ambient background radiation, and of my K1000's signature light leak. They used the streak in my photo of the mountain to identify the jet as an F-16, and even to estimate its speed. The Feds had claimed the attack was an inter-state issue and declined to offer assistance with the investigations, but the pertinent information was already known and believed. It wasn’t a Chinese or Russian jet, and it had come up from the south overland at near maximum speed and a very low altitude. It seemed America was not ready to overcome itself just yet, and the dominant powers thought it easier to extract value from chaos than to let a new order accumulate, however slowly.

When I finally followed the handbook's instructions for account generation, I used one of the new film crypto libraries to generate a seed from my K1000's fingerprint. From what I understood, the account was the same as any ordinary crypto, plucking a unique number from all the astronomically large possible combinations. But when I added the account to my wallet, I found a substantial paystream already open on the newly generated key. Weirder still, the funding transaction from zkapital was broadcast exactly 12 seconds *before* my iconic picture was snapped.
